% More on Finite Automata and Regular Languages
% Alyssa Lytle
% January 20, 2026

<!-- pandoc -t slidy -s notes/02-fa-prac.md -o slides/04-dfa-practice.html --webtex -->


<!-- pandoc -s notes/02-fa-prac.md -o slides/04-dfa-practice.html -->

# More on Finite Automata and Regular Languages 

## Practice [^hopcroft]

Let 

$$ L = \{w | w \textrm{ is of even length and begins with } 01 \}$$

Prove $L$ is a regular language.

## Practice

Let us design a DFA to accept the language:

$$ L = \{w | w \textrm{ is of even length and begins with } 01 \}$$

What we need to track:

* Whether it starts with 01
* Whether the input length is even

## More notation

Let's talk more about our transition function $\delta$...

We've so far discussed $\delta$ in terms of

- $\delta: Q \times \Sigma \to Q$

In other words $\delta$ is handling state transitions given a single input from $\Sigma$.

What if we wanted to discuss *strings* of input?

## Extending the Transition Function to Strings

$$\Hat{\delta}: Q \times \Sigma^* \to Q$$

### Formal Definition

Let $w$ be a string of the form $xa$; 

That is $w= xa$, where $x$ is a string and $a$ is a symbol.

Then 

$$\Hat{\delta}(q,w) = \delta(\Hat{\delta}(q,x),a)$$




## Practice

For the DFA we previously defined, show $\Hat{\delta}(q_0, 0110) = q_2$

## Acceptance Redefined

Now we can use $\Hat{\delta}$ to define acceptance to a language!

In other words, we now have a way to say: 

* "String $x$ is recognized by this automaton". 
* "String $x$ is accepted by the language generated by this automaton."

Acceptance means that the DFA ends in an accept state, so we can say:

For automaton $M = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, s, F)$, 

$x \in L(M)$, iff $\Hat{\delta}(s,x) \in F$.

## Proving Properties About Automata [^sipser] [^kozen]

### Want to Prove (WTP):

Assume $A$ and $B$ are regular languages. Then $A \cap B$ is also regular.

## Proving Properties About Automata 

### Want to Prove (WTP):

Assume $A$ and $B$ are regular languages. Then $A \cap B$ is also regular.

If $A$ and $B$ are regular, then there exist automata

$M_1 = (Q_1, \Sigma, \delta_1, s_1, F_1)$

$M_2 = (Q_2, \Sigma, \delta_2, s_2, F_2)$

With $L(M_1) = A$ and $L(M_2) = B$.

To prove $A \cap B$ is regular, we need to build an automaton for it!

*It's a proof by construction!*

## Proof by Construction

Has two main elements:

1. The construction
2. Proof that the construction satisfies the claim

## Proof by Construction

Has two main elements:

1. Construction of automaton $M_3$ 
2. Proof that $L(M_3) = L(M_1) \cap L(M_2)$

## Construction of $M_3$

* $L(M_1) = A$ and $L(M_2) = B$.
* $M_1 = (Q_1, \Sigma, \delta_1, s_1, F_1)$
* $M_2 = (Q_2, \Sigma, \delta_2, s_2, F_2)$


Let $M_3 = (Q_3, \Sigma, \delta_3, s_3, F_3)$

with 

## Proof that $L(M_3) = L(M_1) \cap L(M_2)$

We're going to work with this assumption: 

### Lemma A

For all $x \in \Sigma^*$, $\Hat{\delta_3}((p,q),x) = (\Hat{\delta_1}(p,x),\Hat{\delta_2}(q,x))$.


## Proof that $L(M_3) = L(M_1) \cap L(M_2)$

### Our Toolbox (What We Know)

* $L(M_1) = A$ and $L(M_2) = B$.
* $M_1 = (Q_1, \Sigma, \delta_1, s_1, F_1)$
* $M_2 = (Q_2, \Sigma, \delta_2, s_2, F_2)$
* Our Construction of $M_3= (Q_3, \Sigma, \delta_3, s_3, F_3)$
    * $Q_3 = Q_1 \times Q_2 = \{(p,q) \mid p \in Q_1, q \in Q_2 \}$
    * $\delta_3((p,q),d) = (\delta_1(p,d), \delta_2(q,d))$
    * $s_3 = (s_1,s_2)$
    * $F_3 = F_1 \times F_2$
* Lemma A: $\Hat{\delta_3}((p,q),x) = (\Hat{\delta_1}(p,x),\Hat{\delta_2}(q,x))$.



## Resources

[^hopcroft]: - Hopcroft, John E., Rajeev Motwani, and Jeffrey D. Ullman. "Introduction to automata theory, languages, and computation." Acm Sigact News 32.1 (2001): 60-65.

[^kozen]: - Kozen, Dexter C. Automata and computability. Springer Science & Business Media, 2007.

[^sipser]: - Sipser, Michael. "Introduction to the Theory of Computation." ACM Sigact News 27.1 (1996): 27-29